So here we are in a group meeting.
Rob and I planned a group meeting with Jonathan Taylor
who is sitting over there.
Hello, Jonathan.
Hello.
And this is a meeting we have once a week with our research
graduate students.
And we are going to say hello to some of them.
And you are going to see how excited they are about the
research they are doing.
Hi, I am Will.
I guess to me one of the most exciting things about being in
statistics is that it just applies to so many different
substitute fields.
So anything you might be interested in, from sports to
biology to physics to finance, there is probably some
question that you will want to ask eventually.
And if you have got data to ask that question, then you
need to use statistics.
So, especially being at a university, we get to talk to
really smart computer scientists and really smart
political scientists and really smart biologists and
play a helpful role in what they are doing pretty often.
Hi, I am Sam.
I am a graduate student in statistics.
One thing that really excites me about statistics is that we
live in a world where we have more and more data available
to ourselves.
People are walking around wearing these bracelets that
track every step they take, they monitor their sleep.
And so now we have more data than we know what to do with,
just terabytes of data sitting around on hard drives.
And statistics and machine learning gives us a chance to
try and understand that data.
Hi, I am Lydia.
So I decided to get into statistical learning after
working at a startup that were working in DNA analysis.
And so they were trying to find snips and structural
variations in the DNA.
And that made me realize how important the problems that
are solved by statistical learning are.
And it also made me realize how much data there is and how
important it is to develop methods that are very fast and
very accurate at the same time in order to
analyze all that data.
So that is why I decided to get into grad school and
statistical learning.
Statistics and data science has become really popular.
And so we have even got some converts in our group.
And so we have got Christo over here who is a convert
from computer science.
Yeah, I am jointly working with the computer science and
statistics department.
And that is one of the things I really love about stats is
that you can get as theoretical as you want
mathematically, but at the end of the day you can implement
this on a computer.
And even minute little things that you might not think would
make a difference do.
And you can see this with actually data and actual
applications.
It is really awesome.
Christo, did not you work on some capture data recently?
Yeah, we actually showed that using essentially regression
you could actually beat what humans can do in terms of
understanding audio captures, which was pretty remarkable.
And that had some profound implications for a number of
security systems.
It pretty much made everyone change their
audio capture schemes.
Hi, I am Dennis.
One of the projects that really interests me right now
is I am interested in using statistics to study different
educational interventions in the classroom.
So we are conducting experiments in actual Stanford
classrooms to test hypotheses about whether online homework
will help students learn.
Or whether peer grading can help students learn.
When I was looking at Ph.D. programs, I was actually
deciding between doing neuroscience and computer
science and stats.
And one of my big goals at that time was, how do we
tackle this question of what is the
algorithm behind the brain?
And it is a little naive just to say how statistics directly
applies to what the brain is doing.
But, surely, if you think about how we are trying to
make sense of the world statistically, there must be
something we can learn from that about what the brain
might be doing as well to make sense of everything we are
doing in a very noisy world.
So I think that is a very interesting motivation to
solve one of the greatest mysteries of our time.
I am actually a student in neuroscience.
I was lucky enough to do a Master's in statistics here at
Stanford and worked with Jonathan analyzing whole brain
human fMRI analysis, and now I am working with Karl
Hayes-Roth imaging thousands of
neurons in behaving animals.
And both of these situations obviously afford a lot of data
that is quite complicated.
And we still in biology don't really know how to
make sense of it.
So being able to have relationships with departments
like statistics, like if you sit in on meetings and other
things, is really-- and to collaborate with this is
incredibly useful and very enjoyable.
I think one of the core things that fascinates me about
statistics is it has always been true in the world, but it
is increasingly true that we have all of this information
in the world.
It comes in the form of data.
But information is not the same thing as knowledge.
And one of the things that our brains are really good at is
taking in information from all these different sources and
turning it into actionable insights.
And, in statistics, we are not doing things the same way as
your brain does them.
But I think that we are trying to figure out the same thing,
which is how do we go from information to knowledge?
Another good thing that our brains are at doing is
deceiving ourselves.
So seeing patterns in noise, for example, I think that is
called apophenia or something.
There is a Wikipedia article.
And I think one of the important things about
statistics is it helps us to avoid deceiving ourselves when
we are trying to answer important questions about
complicated issues.
Hi, I am Natali.
I am a second year PhD in statistics.
And the thing I really like about statistics is, if you
look at the spectrum of academic fields, on one side
you have fields like mathematics
that are super rigorous.
Everything they know they know with complete certainty
because they have proved it.
But, unfortunately, I think the things that they prove
theorems about do not have as many practical applications as
we would like.
So they know everything there is to know about a billion
groups, say, but you can't go and take that to
the bank, so to speak.
On the other end of the spectrum, you have fields like
economics, sociology, philosophy that ask really,
really important questions.
So what should the Fed do this quarter?
That affects literally billions of
people in the world.
Or what is the meaning of life, in philosophy?
But, unfortunately, they do not know the things that they
know in those fields with very much certainty at all.
In philosophy, specifically, they have been arguing about
what the meaning of life is for 2,000 years.
So the thing I like about statistics is that we have the
rigor of mathematics, but we also talk about
very important questions.
So statistics is used in medicine, in the tech
community, in the sciences, in the social sciences as well.
We answer important questions.
But the things that we know in statistics, we also prove
theorems about.
And we know these things with a lot of certainty.